Hey everybody, I'm Rick Beato. So, back
in March, I made a video called how AI
will fail like the music industry. In
that video, I predicted that all these
data centers that are being built now,
many of them will never get finished.
They will not be needed because people
are going to use AI programs, local LLMs
that are not connected to the internet
because the same thing happened in the
music industry 25 years ago. People used
to record in recording studios. Now,
they record at home on their computer
cuz they don't need recording studios
because computers have gotten so much
faster. Now, since that video came out,
I went to buy a few hard drives. Now, I
typically use solid state hard drives
that are
4 to 8 terabytes. And the kind I use are
Samsung. When I bought these, let's say
a year ago, they costed, I don't know,
$250
for a 4 terabyte and maybe 400 and
$30 for an 8 terabyte. So, I haven't
bought any in a while and I was like,
"Oh, I'm going to buy some stuff cuz I
don't go over drives. I just keep using
them. I buy new ones, use them, I back
them up to the cloud, I back them up
places." So, I go into this place. I
asked the guy, "Hey, can you unlock the
cabinet?" They have them in cabinets and
stuff. So, "Can you unlock the cabinet?"
And all of a sudden, I look in the
cabinet, I see $2,000. And I said to the
guy, "$2,000, what's that for?" He goes,
"That's for the 4 terabyte hard drive."
I'm like, "$2,000? That's insane." And I
see the 8 terabyte one, $4,000 for an 8
terabyte. $4,000?
They had a couple of them in there. I
said, "What's up?" He said, "Oh, yeah,
they've gone up a thousand percent since
last October."
I was like, "A thousand percent? And you
have almost none in there?" Yeah,
because we can't even get them anymore.
And I said, "Why?" Because they're using
them in the data centers. They've
already been bought up. They're buying
them before they even get manufactured.
So, they can't even get any. The same
thing is happening with RAM. Go try and
buy RAM at places. It's
incredibly expensive if they even have
it. So, if you're trying to build a
computer, it's almost impossible to do
that. So, then I was like, "Okay, I need
to get some new cards, memory cards, SD
cards for the camera that I'm recording
on right now." Those have tripled in
prices. Anything with storage have gone
insanely
just through the roof in price. Well,
since then, over the last month I
started seeing things like this. All
these new computers that are coming out
that are basically built to run local
LLMs like I predicted in my video in
March, okay? Check some of these out.
>> Today, I'm excited to announce the AMD
Ryzen AI Halo, a new reference platform
for local AI deployment. This is the
smallest AI development system in the
world, capable of running models with up
to 200 billion parameters locally, not
connected to anything.
>> Microsoft and Nvidia have just [music]
announced the world's most powerful and
efficient thin and light Windows PC
ever. In their words, AI creation, 3D
rendering, and multimodal workflows run
simultaneously [music]
with up to one petaflop of AI compute
and the ability to run 120 billion
parameter models locally.
>> Today, I'm going to show you how to
build and run a gigantic AI workflows
entirely on your Mac using MLX.
No cloud, no API keys, just your
hardware doing the work.
>> Now, in the last video I ran a local
LLM, meaning it was on my computer and
not connected to the internet. The
internet was turned off and I was using
it. That was a 36 billion parameter LLM.
They have LLMs on Hugging Face, the
website that I got it from. They have
over a trillion parameter LLMs. Now, to
run that, to run a trillion parameter
LLM, I know just stick with me here, you
need a minimum of, I think, 512 GB of
RAM, but you really need a terabyte, 2
terabytes, 4 terabytes of RAM, which you
really is difficult to do. But now
they're building these computers that
are optimized to run local LLMs, just
like I predicted. What does that mean?
Well, companies like Nvidia have their
own LLMs that you can download from
their website. You can get LLMs that are
are open source, on Hugging Face you can
find them places, right? People are
starting to use them and the
manufacturers, the people that build
these computers, Apple,
Google, HP,
Microsoft, all these companies are
building computers that can run local
LLMs cuz 90% of what most people need to
do, they can just run on their computer
on a local LLM. You don't need a data
center to do that. Now, another thing is
going on at the same time. Kids, not
only my kids, all my kids' friends and
college students, so many people I
talked to
hate AI. They don't just hate AI slop,
AI videos, things like that. They hate
the concept of AI. They hate AI music.
Anytime they see anything related to AI,
they want to run from it as quickly as
possible. They don't want to hear about
AI music. I'm not saying that people are
not using AI or kids not are not using
AI, but there's a real anti-AI movement
out there. As you can see from these
clips of people giving commencement
address, like Eric Schmidt, who used to
be a Google
>> Time magazine selected its person of the
year for 2025.
And it was this time, it was the
architects of artificial intelligence.
Interesting.
>> [cheering and applause]
>> The rise of artificial intelligence
is
the next industrial revolution.
Oh.
Woo.
What happened?
>> AI is rewriting production as we sit
here.
I know it. Deal with it. Like I said,
it's a tool.
Hey, like I said, you can you can hear
me now or you can pay me later.
>> So, if kids don't want to use AI and you
can run AI locally on your computer not
connected to the internet, what are
these data centers for? Obviously, you
need to train the these AI programs, but
do you need data centers that are the
size of 60 football fields? I was
driving to see a friend yesterday.
And I drove into his neighborhood.
Lives here in Atlanta.
And I noticed two Flock cameras as you
come in. Well, one that films you
coming, one that films you going. And I
asked him, I said, "What's up with the
Flock cameras?"
"I don't know. Our HOA decided to put
them in. There's nothing I can do about
them." If you guys don't know what Flock
cameras are, they're cameras that
basically take your license plate. They
can do all this kind of stuff. There's a
lot of great videos out there. So, what
are they doing with all this information
from these Flock cameras? We are being
surveilled everywhere. They're gathering
all this information about people. You
go to the airport, you have your picture
taken getting on the plane, you have it
taken getting off the plane. You go to
another country, they take your
pictures. All of it is all facial
recognition. All this stuff is being
stored. I guess it's being stored on
these $2,000
4 terabyte solid state hard drives in
the data centers. I don't know why they
need it. I need it to store my videos on
so I can make stuff for YouTube here.
Now, YouTube uses data centers, but they
use it to send the videos out over the
entire world. I'd love to know your
thoughts about this. I just thought I'd
do this updated video on it because it's
amazing to me how many new things have
come out since I made my last video just
a few months ago. It's really
incredible. Love to know your thoughts.
Leave a comment. Hit subscribe. Thanks
for watching.
